The western margin of the Gulf of Mexico (Veracruz State, Mexico) displays an extensive Neogene gravitational system, whereby the Neogene siliciclastic sediments are detached from underlying Mesozoic carbonates along decollement surface in Oligocene underpressured clays. Rapidly subsiding half-grabens develop above the footwall associated with major listric faults, whereas mini-basins develop in the deepest parts of the slope, in conjunction with the growth of west-verging compressional features. Between the highangle normal faults in the west and the thrust anticlines in the east, a wide roll-over structure has grown progressively, resulting in a major topographic break in the morphology of the slope profile. Coupled forward kinematic modelling (Thrustpack) and stratigraphic modelling (Dionisos), calibrated against seismic profiles and two key nearshore wells, have been applied to representative regional transects across the margin, in order to quantify the vertical (subsidence) and horizontal (gravitational) deformations, and to discuss the impact of various key parameters on the distribution of debris flow depositions. These simulations are compared with data from distant ODP wells and discussed in the scope of current exploration strategies in both the US and Mexican portions of the Gulf of Mexico basin. 1. Introduction Passive margins constitute one of the main geodynamic environments in which thick sedimentary wedges can accumulate. They provide natural laboratories where source to sink processes and the whole sedimentary budget (i.e., erosion, transport, sedimentation) can be documented. Due to rapid sedimentation and slope instabilities, passive margins are also commonly the site of gravitational processes that produce deep water compressional systems at the toe of the slope, i.e., in the Niger Delta and Campos basin in the African and Brazilian conjugate Atlantic margins (Damuth, 1994; Cobbold et al., 1995; Rouby and Cobbold, 1996), and in the Perdido fold belt and Mexican Ridges in the deep Gulf of Mexico basin (van Mount et al., 1990; Weimer and Buffler, 1992; Bally et al., 1995; Aranda-Garcia, 1999; Fiduk et al., 1999; Rowan et al., 1999a,b; Trudgill et al., 1999; Wawrzyniec et al., 2003; Ruiz et al., 2004; Camerlo and Benson, 2006). The objective of this paper is to consider the western margin of the Gulf of Mexico (Veracruz State, Mexico), as a well-documented case study to identify and characterize Neogene sediment transfer processes operating between the Cordilleran foothills in the west, and the deep abyssal plain in the east. An investigation of this setting can address several questions. Which fraction of the clastics is trapped within the continental platform and slope, and which fraction is instead transported down slope as far as the abyssal plain? What is the incidence of listric normal faults and deep water compressional features developing at the toe of the gravitational system? How do these tectonic features contribute in localizing the deposition of coarse-grained (sandy) material? Which control is ultimately operated by other forcing forces such as the climate, the thermal subsidence of the margin and the topography of the hinterland in the overall sedimentary architecture and budget of the margin? All these questions have major implications for the petroleum exploration and prediction of reservoir distribution in this yet underexplored frontier area. A quantitative approach combining forward kinematic modelling (Thrustpack) and stratigraphic modelling (Dionisos) is described below, the results of which being discussed at a local scale, as well as with a wider, more global perspective. 2. Geodynamic evolution of the western margin of the Gulf of Mexico This study focuses on the segment of the Gulf of Mexico basin located offshore of the Veracruz State, Mexico (Fig. 1). The central part of the basin is made up of Late Jurassic oceanic crust, whereas its western margin is composed of continental crust and is sub-parallel to the Late Cretaceous to Eocene east-verging Laramide thrust front of the north-trending Cordilleran orogen that extends from Canada to the Central American Isthmus. A huge volume of literature deals with the crustal architecture and paleogeographic evolution of the Gulf of Mexico basin and its surroundings (Moore and del Castillo, 1974; Pilger, 1981; Ortega-Gutierrez et al., 1990; Ewing, 1991; Salvador, 1991a,b; Pindell, 1994; Reed, 1994). We have summarized below the three main evolutionary stages responsible for the overall architecture of the studied transects, including its (1) pre-orogenic, (2) synorogenic and (3) post-orogenic stages. 2.1. Jurassic rifting and Lower Cretaceous carbonate sedimentation of the passive margin Ambrose et al., 2003; Wawrzyniec et al., 2004; Ambrose et al., 2005; Alzaga-Ruiz et al., 2007; Figs. 2 and 3). South-eastward escape of the Yucatan block accounts for the opening of the Gulf of Mexico in the Jurassic. After deposition of Triassic–Middle Jurassic synrift red beds of the Todos Santos Formation in localized grabens, oceanic accretion and thermal subsidence of the margin resulted in a change from continental to marine sedimentation in the Upper Jurassic. Organic-rich black shales were then deposited in the main depocenters, with extensive salt deposits in the northern — US — and south-eastern — Mexican — portions of the Gulf of Mexico (Viniegra, 1971; Peel et al., 1995; Mello et al., 1996; Guzman-Vega and Mello, 1999; Rowan et al., 1999a,b; Gonzalez and Holguin, 2001; Guzman-Vega et al., 2001). During the Cretaceous, thick shallow water carbonates were deposited in prograding platforms bordering the Gulf of Mexico, i.e., in the presently allochthonous Cordoba Platform, which crops out in the Cordilleran foothills west of the Veracruz Basin. Also in the Laramide Chicontepec foreland basin west to the Golden Lane area (Faja de Oro), near the current shore line, Cretaceous reefal carbonates account for the huge petroleum reserves of the Faja de Oro (Viniegra and Castillo-Tejero, 1970; Coogan et al., 1972; Magoon et al., 2001). Deeper water carbonates were also deposited during the Lower Cretaceous in the intervening basins extending between the afore mentioned platforms, i.e., in the Tampico Mizantla Basin located between the Golden Lane and Zongolica Basin, which is located west of the Cordoba Platform, as well as in the distal portions of the passive margin (deep offshore), where the stratigraphic unit remains unknown (Fig. 2). 3. Location and present architecture of the studied transects 2.2. Late Cretaceous to Eocene interactions between the passive margin and the Cordilleran orogen From Campanian onward, the Sierra Madre Oriental in the north, and Tuxpan and Cordoba platforms in the south were progressively accreted into the tectonic wedge of the Cordilleran orogen, resulting in the development of a Late Cretaceous to Eocene flexural basin extending east of the eastward migrating thrust front (Feng et al., 1994; Tardy, 1980; Carfantan, 1985; Suter, 1987; Ferket et al., 2003; Ortuño et al., 2003; Ferket et al., 2004; Alzaga-Ruiz et al., 2007). Along the studied transect, the Laramide flexure accounted for rapid subsidence and deposition of siliciclastic turbidites of the Chicontepec Formation in the foredeep basin developing west of the Golden Lane area, whereas the later, located in the vicinity of the fore bulge, became emerged and partially eroded during the Late Cretaceous and Paleocene (Figs. 2 and 3; Alzaga-Ruiz et al., 2007). For a long time, the topographic high of the Golden Lane accounted for an efficient barrier, preventing the clastics sourced by tectonic uplift and erosion of the Cordilleran foothills from reaching the deep abyssal plain of the Gulf of Mexico. 2.3. Oligocene to Present unroofing of the foothills and development of the offshore siliclastic wedge Thermal subsidence of the passive margin resumed during the Oligocene, after the end of the Laramide orogeny, resulting in the progressive subsidence of the Golden Lane paleohigh. Upper mantle delamination and asthenospheric rise induced by corner mantle flow above the east-dipping subducted oceanic slab is thought to have occurred beneath the formerly thickened continental crust of the Cordilleran orogen, which accounts for both progressive unflexing of the foreland basement, and rapid uplift and unroofing of the Laramide foothills. This uplift of the Cordilleran and foreland basement allowed siliciclastic sediment to bypass the former paleohigh of the Golden Lane and cause rapid progradation of the Neogene sedimentary wedge toward the deepest parts of the Gulf of Mexico (Galloway et al., 2000; Numerous studies have been recently published on the gravita tional system developing in the offshore of Veracruz State (ArandaGarcia, 1999; Wawrzyniec et al., 2003; Ambrose et al., 2005; Le Roy et al., 2005). In another paper (Alzaga-Ruiz et al., 2007), we described in detail the Cenozoic sedimentary infill of the basin, in term of lithostratigraphy, seismic stratigraphic, paleoenvironment and reservoir/seal potential. We shall summarize below the various geological and geophysical data used for the construction of the present day architecture of the sections, prior to detail the modelling part of the study, which constitutes the main focus of this paper. 3.1. Location and interpretation of the time sections Both onshore and offshore seismic profiles have been used to constrain the overall architecture of the regional transects (Fig. 1). Four onshore wells and two offshore wells penetrating the entire Cenozoic stratigraphic column have also been used for constraining the stratigraphic age of units producing the main reflectors, as well as for the lithostratigraphic interpretation of the sections (Fig. 1). Because no well is yet available in the deep offshore, long regional seismic profiles have also been used for tying the sequence boundaries observed in the offshore of Veracruz State with DSDP wells (site 88 down to the Pliocene, site 89 down to the Upper Miocene, sites 90 and 91 down to Middle Miocene, Ewing et al., 1969; Worzel et al., 1973; Buffler, 1983; Buffler et al., 1984; Bouma, 1982; Bouma et al., 1986), and coeval well identified series of the deepest parts of the Gulf of Mexico (Ladd et al., 1976; Watkins et al., 1978; Shaub et al., 1984; Buffler, 1985, 1991; Feng, 1995; Feng and Buffler, 1996; Dohmen, 2002). Current knowledge of the lithostratigraphy of the basin and tentative correlations between onshore and nearshore series with deep offshore series are documented in Fig. 2. Although the stratigraphic columns are continuous in the former Laramide foredeep in the west and in the deep offshore in the east, the Golden Lane area and adjacent nearshore domain are characterized by a major gap in the stratigraphic record. This is primarily due to the Late Cretaceous emergence of the Laramide forebulge and progressive onlaping of Cenozoic series on top of Lower Cretaceous carbonates. Alternatively, listric normal faults of the gravitational system could also cause direct juxtaposition of Miocene series on top of preOligocene series (Lower Cretaceous and/or Paleocene–Eocene?), with a complete lack of Oligocene in the footwall of the main Neogene drag syncline (Figs. 3 and 4). 3.2. Depth conversion of the seismic profiles We performed a depth conversion of the seismic interpretations before to address the forward kinematic modelling. Interval velocities of the main lithostratigraphic intervals have been determined from direct calibration against the four onshore wells # 1, 2, 3, 4, and the two offshore wells # 5 and 6 (Fig.1). These values, which are summarized in Table 1, have been subsequently used to convert the line-drawings of the time sections into the depth domain. Velocity analyses in the wells show locally anomalous low velocities at the top of the Lower Cretaceous carbonates, in the range of 2900 to 3200 m/s, instead of 5000 m/s values that would be expected for carbonates. Because these wells are located in the vicinity of the former bulge, where the Mesozoic platform was emergent during the Laramide orogeny, we have assumed that these low velocity values could be due to the development of karstification and brecciation. Ultimately, velocity calibrations are only available for the few tens of meters of the Mesozoic carbonates, and we have used a uniform average velocity of 5000 m/s for the Cretaceous strata when performing the depth conversion and compiling the geometry of the basement. 3.3. Overall structural style and decollement levels The top of the Mesozoic carbonates can be traced accurately along the entire profiles. In contrast, the precise location of the top of the infra-Jurassic basement remains more conjectural. Only at a discrete number of locations, it is possible to identify unambiguously synrift Jurassic faults controlling thickness variations in the synrift sedimentary sequence. The Lower Cretaceous build-ups of the Golden Lane control the main thickness variations in the post-rift sequences of the passive margin. Above the post-Laramide unconformity, the overall architecture of the Cenozoic siliciclastic wedge of the Veracruz margin is dominated by a Neogene gravitational system developing between proximal listric normal faults and the outboard compressional system of the Mexican Ridges, at the toe of the slope (Figs. 5 and 6). The main Neogene depocenter is located in a drag syncline or half-graben located beneath the current transition between the continental platform and the slope, which is controlled by a major east-dipping listric normal fault. Farther east, a major break occurs in the slope profile at the eastern end of a coeval mega-roll-over feature, at a place where a reverse fault accommodates part of the down-slope gliding of the sedimentary sequence. In the deeper water parts of the profile, other antithetic, west-verging reverse faults account also for the localisation localization of growth anticlines, with the development of intervening mini-basins (Figs. 5 and 6). Unlike in the northern and south-eastern parts of the Gulf of Mexico basin, where mobilization of Jurassic salt and related canopies accounts for the gravitational gliding of both Mesozoic and Cenozoic series, the Veracruz margin has not been shown to contain significant salt deposits (Tampico Mizantla basin). As in the Amazon fan delta, this gravitational thin-skinned detachment develops entirely within an overpressured siliciclastic wedge (Cobbold et al., 2004), which is here made up of the post-orogenic series. Although part of the basal decollement may locally reactivate the post-Laramide unconformity, especially in the vicinity of the former bulge, we assume here that overpressured Oligocene clays account for the regional decoupling observed between post- and pre-orogenic series. Poor reflectivity in the core of the growth anticlines associated with pull-down deflection of underlying reflectors is further evidence of a ductile flow of the Oligocene clays producing localized mud diapirism. An extensive literature based on natural case studies, sand box experiments and analogue modelling has already documented the evolution of listric faults and thin-skinned detachments operating in gravitational systems, in either salt- or clay-dominated margins (Chapman, 1974; Dailly, 1976; Crans et al., 1980; Vendeville et al., 1987; Nelson, 1991; Cobbold et al., 1995; Rowan et al., 1999a,b; Hudec and Jackson, 2006; Mourgues and Cobbold, 2006). The objective of the modelling attempts described below is not to duplicate the ductile deformation operating along the basal decollement, but rather to explore the interactions between (1) a mobile topography of the slope induced by a coupled extensional–compressional system, and (2) lateral transport and deposition of clastics in coeval depocenters developing within the slope, piggyback of the thin-skin allochthon, in order to predict which fraction of the clastics could ultimately escape the continental platform and slope and contribute to potential reservoirs in the deep offshore. 3.4. Restoration of the section into its pre-extensional geometry Another pre-requisite before initiating the Thrustpack forward modelling was to restore the depth section to its pre-deformational, Oligocene stage (Fig. 7). This restoration was performed manually, by palinspastically restoring the top Oligocene horizon. We took into account the lateral motion along the listric and reverse fault systems to restore the geometry of the Oligocene series, and the assumed paleobathymetry during Oligocene sedimentation, in order to propose a realistic attitude of the Cretaceous carbonate series and underlying basement prior to the deposition and onset of the gravitational gliding of the Neogene series. We preserved the overall thickness of Oligocene series during the restoration, because they are still clearly overpressured and were thus probably affected by sedimentary burial but limited compaction during the Neogene. The restored geometry (Oligocene stage) was then used as the initial geometry for subsequent Thrustpack forward kinematic modelling, whereas the Present structural section was used as a template for quality control of the final modelling stage (Present geometry computed by Thrustpack). 4. Forward kinematic modelling and timing of the deformation Numerous kinematic scenarios were addressed during Thrustpack modelling, using a trial-and-error process, until the final geometry of the model could be ultimately validated against the template of the depth converted geological profile (Fig. 8). Apart from the present location of the faults, the depth to the basement and the overall thickness of Neogene strata, we paid a special attention to fit the actual configuration of the drag syncline, onlaps and roll-over structure associated with the main listric fault developing near the platform to slope transition. Other details, such as the dipping attitude of antithetic reverse faults and accurate shape of west-verging growth anticlines developing down slope of the first, major east-verging reverse fault, were only grossly simulated. Thirteen individual tectono-stratigraphic modules were first selected in the initial section, each of them being defined by its surface topography, the basal detachment and either listric or reverse border faults, before to be displaced/deformed by incremental deformation. Accommodation space for the deposition of synkinematic sediments was continuously controlled by combining the constraints of the paleobathymetry with the subsidence of the basement of the model. No erosion was applied to the model. Table 2 summarizes the values selected for the main modelling parameters, including (1) the lateral displacement of the main allochthonous unit (i.e., the module limited in the west by the major listric fault and to the east by the roll-over and associated reverse fault), (2) the instant velocity of this module during its displacement along the basal décollement, and (3) the vertical subsidence of the basement), and thus, for each of the successive stages of the modelling. Four stages of deformation/sedimentation were simulated between the initial Oligocene stage and present in order to fit the main sequence boundaries interpreted on the seismic profiles. They comprise the Lower Miocene (lasting 2 Ma), the Upper Miocene (lasting 8 Ma), and the Holocene (lasting 1.62 Ma). Intermediate geometries derived from this forward kinematic modelling were subsequently used as quality control for intermediate stages computed with the Dionisos stratigraphic modelling described below. 5. Stratigraphic modelling and Neogene sediment transfer across the margin Stratigraphic modelling is a powerful tool to create a 3D numerical model of a sedimentary basin. Such a modelling allows us to test and quantify the role and interaction of different sedimentary processes, and to better analyse a geological model or a seismic interpretation. In this paper, a 2D stratigraphic modelling along a 140 km long section (with a grid point spacing of 250 m), was performed to simulate the sediment transfer, from the littoral plain to the Deep Basin of the Gulf of Mexico (DBGM). Although the simulation started during the Upper Eocene at 38 Ma, the numerical study was focused on the Miocene and Pliocene, from 23.5 Ma up to today (with a time step of 0.5 Ma). In the section below, we shall first describe the overall lithostratigraphy of the simulated section, then the sedimentary model deduced from outcrop studies and seismic interpretation, and finally the stratigraphic modelling. 5.1. Stratigraphic description Seismic profiles, wells and outcrop data have been studied jointly and combined to derive a realistic sedimentary model of the Neogene series for the entire onshore-offshore transect. The seismic horizons correlated across DBGM comprise the top Basement, the top Jurassic, the top Cretaceous, the Campeche horizon, the Lower and the Middle Cordilleras Mexicans horizons, which represent the bottom and the top of the Oligocene series, respectively, and the top Miocene. These horizons or seismic surfaces limit several seismic sequences that are coeval to stratigraphic units cropping out in the foothills of the Sierra Madre Oriental. Given our main objective here as the study of the Neogene sediment transfer and coeval development of a roll-over system, we shall focus below on the description of the lithostratigraphy of the Oligocene to Miocene series. 5.1.1. Oligocene and Neogene seismic sequences Tables 3 and 4 show the seismic attributes or characters of the seismic reflection surfaces and seismic sequences used for seismic sections AA′ and BB′. 5.1.1.1. Seismic sequences of section AA′ (Fig. 4) 5.1.1.1.1. Oligocene seismic sequence. Onshore, the Oligocene seismic sequence extends from 0.25 to 1 s TWT. It constitutes a basin scale blanket, extending across the entire basin, covering the Eocene strata and underlying Quaternary deposits, even extending over the Tuxpan Platform (TxP) paleohigh. At the base, its internal forms and reflection patterns are subparallel, with downlaps towards the east. Near the top, its reflection patterns are either chaotic-contorted or hummocky. In the offshore and DBGM, the Oligocene sequence is referred to as the Middle Cordilleras Mexicanas sequence (MCM, Shaub et al., 1984). MCM rests on top of the Campeche horizon and is overlain by Neogene series. Oligocene reflectors display an average reflection intensity. They are broken, with lateral changes in average amplitude. 5.1.1.1.2. Miocene seismic sequence. This unit rests in obvious concordance on the Oligocene seismic sequence. Its top displays downlap terminations with the older layers. Onshore, this unit is characterized by a horizontal reflection configuration. Farther east, the Miocene seismic sequence has an oblique reflection configuration with an eastward progradation, whereas its base displays a mounded reflection pattern. The Miocene seismic sequence is only documented in the central part of the seismic profile, east of the TxP. 5.1.1.2. Seismic sequences of section BB′ (Fig. 6) 5.1.1.2.1. Oligocene seismic sequence (Middle Cordilleras Mexicanas, MCM). The Oligocene seismic sequence (MCM) has been calibrated in the seismic section BB′, using the well # 6, which cuts 300 m of Oligocene sandstone and limestone. The MCM sequence shows apparent onlap termination on the main regional listric fault. This sequence displays clinoform progradation and oblique subparallel downlap terminations over the mounded Middle Cretaceous seismic sequence. On the slope the geometries are chaotic with lateral changes towards the bottom slope (to the east), where the MCM sequence displays subparallel reflection configuration and locally shingled-facies (i.e., at km 60 and 70). 5.1.1.2.2. Miocene and and Pliocene seismic sequence (Fig. 6). The well # 6 cuts through 3500 m of Neogene neritic sand clay and displays an aggradational–progradational stacking pattern, with an upward increase of sand (Fig. 11). DSDP site 89 wells in the deep basin also contain Pliocene and upper Miocene siliciclastic sediments. The offshore Neogene sequence (see seismic section AA′) overlies the TxP and also extends laterally eastward. The Miocene seismic horizons have a strong intensity and continuity of reflection. The reflection configurations are oblique from west to east, progradational, subparallel, convergent and divergent in the roll-over system, and finally display subparallel scours. The top of this seismic sequence exhibits downlap terminations over the roll-over anticline. Distinct seismic facies occur locally, including lenses with downlap terminations on both sides, slumps, scours, channels, as well as hummocky seismic facies. The overall subparallel reflection configuration is therefore locally changed toward a shingle seismic sequence, characterizing a chaotic seismic facies. 5.1.2. Sedimentology based on outcrops and bore hole cores 5.1.2.1. Oligocene series 5.1.2.1.1. Lower Palma Real and Upper Palma Real formations. The Lower Palma Real Formation (Pri) overlies conformably the Tantoyunca and Chapopote formations. The Upper Palma Real Formation (Prs) underlies conformably the Coatzintla Formation. There is no unconformity between the Lower and Upper Palma Real formations. Both formations are made up of shale and sand interbeds with grey greenish colour, and local conglomerates. Toward the top, it contains 450 up to 1300 m thick Oligocene reefal interbeds. Biostratigraphic data from wells # 3 and 4 indicate that the Lower and Upper Palma Real formations are Early Oligocene and Late Oligocene in age, respectively. Their sediments are bathyal to neritic. 5.1.2.2.2. Escolin and Tuxpan formations. The Escolin and Tuxpan formations have an average thickness of 100 to 200 m (Hernandez et al., 2004). In the well # 4, these formations are 225 m thick. The Escolin Formation is Lower Miocene in age (Espinoza, 1992). The base of the Escolin Formation is concordant with the Coatzintla Formation; its top is disconformable with the Tuxpan Formation. Outcrop studies of the Escolin and Tuxpan formations focused on the description of some reference stratigraphic sections. The Escolin Formation has been studied in detail in the Papantla section. This formation is composed of sandy siltstone of mediumcoarse-grained sandstone, and calcareous sandstone. The sandy siltstone layers are 1 to 4 m thick, while the sand layers are 15 to 70 cm thick. The siltstone layers display oblique stratifications. In the more massive strata, pebbles occur locally. Conglomeratic siltstone units show structures indicative of gravity flow, and also contain levels of shells (mollusks). The chalky sands are middle grain with bioclasts and mollusks shells. Some sandstone layers are discontinuous and display U-shape structures or lenses. From bottom to top, the Papantla section (Fig. 9) comprises: 5.1.2.2. Miocene series 5.1.2.2.1. Coatzintla Formation. The Coatzintla Formation is an upward-coarsening succession of sandstone, siltstone and claystone. These sediments were deposited in a shallow water paleoenvironment and constitute a transgression–regression cycle. The Coatzintla Formation has an average thickness of 350 m in the wells # 3 and 4. The age of the Coatzintla Formation is Late Oligocene to Early Miocene (Carreño, 1986). – 11 m of sandy siltstone. Thickness of individual beds ranges from 1.70 to 2.0 m. These layers sometimes show oblique stratification. Pebbles horizons contain also shells (Turritella) and other bioclasts, which occur also locally in 15 to 40 cm-thick sandy limestone beds. Sometime these layers are discontinuous and folded and display sedimentary figures indicative of gliding (facies 1). Conglomerates have a siltstone matrix and contain limestone, chert pebbles, and bioclasts, the size of which ranging from 2 or 5 up to 15 cm (facies 3). – 3.4 m of sandstones, locally poorly consolidated. Beds are 0.80 to 1 m-tick. These sandstones contain shells and small limestone pebbles. Sometime the beds show a coarse grading (facies 2). – 19.6 m of siltstone and conglomerate with coarse graded and pebbles layers with an oblique pattern. Sometimes the clayey siltstone beds display fossil roots prints (facies 4). Conglomerates are dominantly made up of chert pebbles, the size of which being comprised between 5 and 10 cm. The Tuxpan Formation is made up of 20 to 50 cm-thick beds of grey laminated clayey siltstone, and 5 to 10 cm-tick sandstone beds with oblique stratification. Sandstone beds are overlain by discontinuous polygenetic conglomerates, with pebbles composed of limestone, and fragments of reef and volcanics. 5.2. Sedimentary model of the Neogene During the Eocene–Oligocene the flexural subsidence was less than the sedimentation rate (sf b rs). The resulting decrease of the bathymetry was recorded by a progressive change from levee-channel deposits towards shelf edge and near-shore deposits and finally fluvial deposits in the Miocene. A generalized oblique progradation towards the east can be observed along the seismic sections AA′ and BB′. Once the foreland basin became filled in the west, oblique progradational clinoforms draped over the TxP, and sediment transport continued downslope. Thus the sedimentary load applied on top of undercompacted Oligocene shales increased and gravity collapse of the slope toward the BPGM initiated (Fig. 10). The well # 6 displays progradational sedimentary cycles in the lower to middle part of the well, characterized by gradual changes from sand to silt, consistent with upper slope deposits (Fig. 11). The 37 upper part of the well log records the change from deltaic bars to marine depositional environments. In the outcrops to the west, characteristic deltaic features are exposed, the facies f3 and f4 being fluvial–deltaic. In contrast, the facies f1 and f2 are shoreface deposits. Toward the top of the Escolin Formation the beds display oblique structures (facies f1, Fig. 9). Also in the seismic section, the shoreline results from a regression or sea level fall, after the Upper Miocene transgression cycle (the base is a conglomerate, i.e., the Tuxpan Formation). Upper Miocene sediments increased the load applied over the Lower and Middle Miocene series, the facies f1 accounting for sedimentary features which are characteristic for gravity gliding and ductile flow of the beds (Coleman et al., 1983). Apart of this transfer of Neogene sediments towards the DBGM, the entire slope is dissected by an extensional fault system (roll-over), developing over the Eocene sediments (slide or decollement surface). This roll-over system accounts also for a progradation of fluvial– deltaic sands and offshore bars. East of the roll-over, reflections in the Miocene series are subparallel, but still sometimes display channels, scours and slide facies. These facies probably relate to marine currents that circulated in the lower parts of growth anticlines, which developed synchronously with the roll-over systems. 5.3. Sensitivity of parameters by stratigraphic modelling The stratigraphic modelling of these sediments requires numerous input data. Among the key parameters, we had to secure the calibration against wells and seismic data, the main output result being the present stratigraphic architecture of the margin. We have also performed a number of sensitivity tests of the stratigraphic modelling to specific parameters, in particular we have tested two basin models, the first one assuming a basin closure west of the deep water thrust domain (model focusing on the effect of the roll-over system), the other, wider regional model involving also the deep offshore. 5.3.1. Work flow Based on the above seismic interpretation and sedimentary model, we used Dionisos, a numerical forward stratigraphic model, to simulate the evolution of the Gulf of Mexico during the Neogene (Granjeon,1997; Granjeon and Joseph,1999; Granjeon and Wolf, 2007). This simulation is performed from the top Eocene (38 Ma) up to the present in a sequence of time steps. At each time step, three main actions are performed: The first action relates to the computation of the basin deformation: (1) the sedimentary depocenter is divided in two parts due to the decollement surface, i.e. a growth fault system in the west side (extensive part of the basin), and a reverse fault or diapirs domain in the east side (compressive domain), then (2) the sedimentary units above the decollement surface are moved eastward to take into account the horizontal gravitational deformation of the basin, assuming a vertical shear deformation, and finally (3) tectonic subsidence, flexure and compaction are simulated. The eustatic chart constructed by Pemex, and Hernandez et al. (2004) for the Tampico Mizantla basin, which outlines the sea level changes of the basin, is used to describe the eustatic variations. The second action relates to the definition of sedimentary supply coming from the hinterland: (1) three lithologies, or grain classes, are defined, corresponding to sand (mean grain size = 0.2 mm), silt (mean grain size= 0.02 mm), and shale (mean grain size= 0.002 mm). (2) Sedimentary supply at each time step is defined as a water discharge (m 3 /s), containing a given concentration of each lithology. Due to the large-scale progradation of the margin, the sand fraction introduced in the basin progressively increased from the Lower Miocene up to the present. Although the sand fraction coming from the hinterland might have been constant, the sand fraction introduced at the boundary of the simulated area should be increased, as sand that was trapped along the slope margin, outside of the simulated area, was later released into the study area, where it created the observed progradational clinoform deposits. In order to represent in a simple way the seasonal evolution of the water discharge, we assumed that there are two extreme seasons operating each year: a relatively dry period and a wetter period. In this paper, we assumed that the wet period is over 3 months per year (rain gauge chart of Veracruz, Mexico), the water discharge is multiplied by 10, accounting for 80% of the whole sedimentary supply being introduced in the basin during this period. The third and last action relates to the simulation of the sediment transport using deterministic laws and the mass balance principles: (1) the overall physiography of the basin is first checked. If in some part of the basin, the basin slope is higher than a critical angle (assumed constant in this paper, and equal to 100 m/km, or 5.7°), then all sediments above this critical slope are assumed to be unstable, transformed in a debris flow, and moved downward. (2) Long-term sediment transport is then simulated assuming a low-concentration hyperpycnal flow transport regime, and thus using a water-driven diffusion equation, in which the volume of each lithology transported along the basin floor is proportional to the water discharge and basin slope. 5.3.2. Results of the stratigraphic modelling Dionisos simulations provide two sets of results: (1) the stratigraphic architecture that represents the seismic reflection configuration and (2) the lithology fraction inside the sediments (sand versus silt versus shale) which accounts also for the seismic facies evidenced on the seismic section BB′. The objective of stratigraphic modelling is to fit the final architecture of the model with the overall configuration of the intra-Miocene seismic reflectors of seismic section BB′. Subsequently, a predictive interpretation of the lithofacies can be proposed for distal portions of the transect where no calibration well is yet available (Fig. 12). We have tested here the sensitivity of the model to two major parameters: the sand fraction inside the sedimentary supply and the relative water discharge, and their impact on the basin stratigraphy and in particular on the volume and net-to-gross ratio of the debris flows. Although all simulations (Fig. 13) gave more or less the same overall geometries, and the same distribution of debris flows, a detailed analysis of these debris flows and their lithological characteristics displays interesting results (Fig. 14). 5.3.2.1. Sensitivity to the sand fraction. Based on our reference simulation (Fig. 12), we modified the sand fraction in the sedimentary supply, removing or adding 15% of sand. The average sand fraction varies then from 7% to 37%, with an average of 22%. As it is harder to transport sandy than shaly sediments, taking all other parameters constant, an increase of the sand fraction induces a steeper depositional profile and less sediments are transported basinward, and thus a more important progradation of the basin shelf and a more sand more starved basin. As the sand fraction in the sedimentary supply increases, the sand fraction of the shelf edge increases, and as the debris flow is mainly associated with shelf edge unstability in our case, the overall net-to-gross ratio in the debris flows increases. However, the volume of debris flows observed during the Upper Miocene and the Pliocene decreases. Due to the steeped profile, the shelf edge has indeed prograded farther inside the basin, and is now located quite far east from the growth fault, in a more stable part of the basin. 5.3.2.2. Sensitivity to water discharge. Also based on our reference simulation (Fig. 12), we subsequently modified the water discharge and multiplied it by a ratio from 0.5 to 2.0. The result of this sensitivity test is quite similar to the previous one on the sand fraction (Fig. 12), but in the opposite way. If we reduce the water discharge, it becomes harder for the water flow to transport sediment, thus resulting in a steeper profile. Therefore a decrease of the water supply is more or less equivalent to an increase of the sand fraction for the steep edge, but also for the volume and net-to-gross ratio of the debris flows (Fig. 13). 6. Discussion and perspectives The main processes controlling the Neogene sedimentary deposits are: - The sediment supply which drives large volumes of clastics in the offshore and slope (such large sedimentary influx is responsible for a sedimentary load that induces the roll-over system); - The roll-over system itself, which creates available space for the sediments and adjacent shortening and folding in the sedimentary wedge east of the roll-over system. This large sedimentary volume is produced by rapid sedimentation-rates or at least a sedimentation rate greater than rate of basin subsidence. Rapid sedimentation of Neogene clastic and coeval development of a prograding sedimentary wedge are sufficient to account for the development of overpressured conditions in underlying Oligocene clays, resulting in ductile behaviour that causes the development of a decollement for the roll-over system and coeval compressional system 39 developing at the toe of the wedge, as well as to further transfer of sediments toward DBGM. The present stratigraphic modelling was focused on the architecture and sand/clay ratio of Neogene siliciclastic deposits of an offshore segment of the western margin of the Gulf of Mexico, namely the shelf and slope of the Veracruz State. Further studies will be required to provide a more comprehensive mass balance at the scale of the entire passive margin and adjacent part of the abyssal plain. At this stage (Late Paleogene and Neogene), paleothermometers (Ro, Tmax, Th of fluid inclusions) already provide information on the paleoburial of Mesozoic carbonates of the Cordoba Platform prior to its tectonic accretion in the Cordilleran foothills, thus accounting for up to 4 km of erosion of synflexural Late Cretaceous to Eocene siliciclastic flexural sequences near the current location of the Laramie thrust front (Ortuño et al., 2003; Ferket et al., 2003, 2004), which is in good agreement with the erosional profiles observed in the seismic sections west of the Golden Lane (Alzaga-Ruiz et al., 2007; Fig. 4). However, only a fraction of the sedimentary pile of the deep offshore is likely to come from the eastward lateral transfer of sediments from adjacent onshore area in the Tamaulipas State, the sea currents reported in the Gulf of Mexico basin during the Neogene being dominated by a north-to-south flow direction (Araujo, 2004). The overall physiography of the Gulf of Mexico accounts for two major fan deltas sourced by the Rio Bravo and Mississippi in the north, but also for potential sedimentary influx from the south, i.e. Rio Grijalva and Usumacinta, from the Chiapas foothills, at a place where the oceanic basin narrows. Alternatively, pelagic sedimentation is also likely to contribute to part of the sedimentary thickness beneath the abyssal plain, and we are clearly missing deep wells in this domain to describe properly the respective contribution of redeposited con tinental material from local marine production in the final sedimentary budget. As it stands, our model probably still underestimates the amount of coarse grain (sandy) clastics likely to be trapped in the numerous mini-basins which have developed between the main listric fault and associated roll-over in the west, and the abyssal plain in the east. Further 3D structural and stratigraphic forward modelling will be required to better handle the interactions between the different tectonostratigraphic blocks, sediment sources and sediment pathways. Acknowledgements IMP and PEMEX provided continuous support and access to the subsurface data. William Sassi and Nicolaas Hardebol provided valuable recommendations for the kinematic modelling. Two reviewers contributed in improving/clarifying the initial manuscript. ABSTRACT This paper sets up a hypothetical model, based on simple assumptions, and investigates the constraints these A model is presented that relates faults to migration assumptions impose upon trapping and migration. This and entrapment. The basic assumption of the model is paper also demonstrates the inherent predictability the that a fault is neither a seal nor a conduit. Therefore, the model can provide for trap analysis and the parameters effect of faulting on both migration and entrapment critical to this predictability. Additionally, the paper depends on the rock properties of strata juxtaposed by illustrates an analytical technique called fault-planethe fault and on the structural attitude of the juxtaposed section analysis. Geologists harbor a variety of opinions fault blocks. Fault-plane sections used with structure concerning the role played by faulting in the migration maps give a three-dimensional view of migration and and trapping of hydrocarbons (Howell, 1988). Many of trapping, and they illustrate the interplay of three critical these opinions are based on good data or sound theory; parameters: (1) closure style, i.e., unf aulted anticline, my purpose is not to evaluate these opinions. faulted anticline, or nose, (2) cross-fault geometry, i.e., the throw and change of throw along a fault, and (3) stratigraphic geometry, i.e., the thickness and spacing of MODEL permeable and impermeable units. Cross-fault spillpoints define limits of trapping potential and paths for vertical migration. Synclinal spillpoints define strati The model is based on the following simple assumpgraphic tops of vertical migration paths and egress points tions: (1) a fault itself has no sealing properties, (2) a fault for lateral migration. The validity and importance of the is not an open conduit, and (3) the trapping and migra basic assumptions of the model can be evaluated by com- tion relationships at a fault depend upon the faultparison with oil field characteristics in specific provinces. juxtaposed stratigraphy. Therefore, impermeable beds juxtaposed against permeable beds are assumed to provide a seal in structural closure and that permeable beds INTRODUCTION against permeable beds allow hydrocarbons to spill across a fault. Although these assumptions are not uniThe approach I have taken in this paper^ was devel- versally true, the model lets us develop the consequences oped to investigate and display the relationships of to define what should occur under conditions where the hydrocarbons to structures in the Gulf Coast deltaic and assumptions are valid. Structural styles found in nature vary from the simple interdeltaic setting. The investigation tried to predict (1) which closures have a high probability of being traps and unfaulted anticlines and single-fault faulted noses to the (2) the amounts of hydrocarbons these traps could con- highly faulted complex uplifts. Every structure, at a tain. The approach has since been applied to a wide vari- given map level, can be considered to consist of one or more areas of closure. These are map-defined areas ety of geologic settings in other geographic regions. whose boundaries can be unfaulted closing contours, synclines, or one or more faults. If the boundary of an area of closure is a fault, an evaluation of that fault\'s capacity to provide a trap depends ©Copyright 1989. The American Association of Petroleum Geologists. All upon an interpretation of the nature of the boundary. If a rights reserved. fault is assigned a sealing property, then the closure is ^Manuscript received, February 26,1988; accepted, March 10,1989. ^Shell Western E&P Inc., Houston, Texas 77001-0572. assumed to provide a trap to a column height where the My thanks to Shell Oil Company and Shell Western E&P Inc. for permission assumed sealing capacity is exceeded. For this model, to publish this paper. Particular notice is given to work done on the early testing however, faults are assumed to have neither leaking nor of this model by Raymond Brady and Charles O\'Neill, geologists formerly with Shell Oil Company. Special appreciation is extended to Miner Long and John sealing properties, and the trapping potential of each Smith for reviewing this paper Their long association with the application of fault-dependent area of closure depends upon the stratigthis model at Shell allowed them to provide criticisms resulting in valuable raphy juxtaposed along the fault boundaries. improvements In the paper\'s clarity. This paper was presented at the AAPG-sponsored "Seals for HydrocarTherefore, trap and migration analyses using this txms" conference (Allan, 1980) and again at the SEPM Migration Symposium model depend upon an analysis of the stratigraphic rela(Allan, 1986). Parts of the paper were summarized in an AAPQ article (Downey, 1984). tionships across the faults (Hughes, 1960). Hence, the \'The author began work on this model in 1967 for a Texas offshore lease trapping potential at a fault can differ for each permeasale after which it received further testing and development at Shell\'s Offshore ble unit within fault-dependent closure, and any given fault closure may not trap to the closure spillpoint or may not trap at all. FAULT-PLANE SECTION A fault-plane section (also termed "fault section" or "fault-surface section") is a display of the geometry of the stratigraphy brought into contact by fault displacement, i.e., two sides of a fault juxtaposed. "Bvo sections are made to the same scale and have a common line of section, which is the strike of the fauh plane being inves tigated. The plane of the sections is not vertical, as in normal cross sections, but is the plane of the fault. The bedding dips of the stratigraphy in the sections are the apparent dips of the beds at the fault in each fault block. If faults did not change throw along strike and if stratigraphic geometry and character remained uniform along the strike of a fault, we would not need to construct faultplane sections. One conventional cross section would be sufficient. However, because throw change along strike is the normal, most observed circumstance, the only substi tute for a fault-plane section would be a very inconveniently large number of conventional cross sections. FAULT-PLANE-SECTION ANALYSIS In fault-plane-section analysis, we investigate the trap ping potential of a fault by virtue of stratigraphic juxtaposition. When used with appropriate structure maps, this analysis provides a three-dimensional approach to trap analysis. To illustrate the application of fault-plane-section analysis to trap and migration analysis and to develop the model, I have used simplified examples (cases 1-7). Although simplified, these examples are taken from field cases that depict situations where the observed data fit with an explanation based on the assumptions of the model. The examples have no map scale, no contour labels, and no scale on the fault-plane sections because the technique is independent of scale to portray uncluttered, the relative geometrical relationships. Structure changes with depth; closure styles and boundaries, bedding dips and fault throws also change with depth. Thus, having the appropriate map from each stratigraphic level analyzed is important. However, for this paper, one structure map is used for all levels because this simphfication does not alter the principles demonstrated. My examples are taken mainly from a clastic environment; however, this approach to trap and migration analysis applies to any stratigraphic sequence where closure is fault dependent. The differentiation of permeable from impermeable units, regardless of lithology, is the input required to depict the stratigraphic geometry—the thickness and spacing of permeable and impermeable beds. Figure 1 depicts a structure that could be a few to tens of miles across. The structure is obviously a faulted antichne separated into upthrown and downthrown areas of fault closure by a fault that changes throw along its strike. The throw change is manifested in different apparent dips—even different dip directions—and crestal offsets along the fault. In addition to the two areas of fault closure, the structure has an area of unfaulted simple closure, restricted to the unfaulted closing contour in the downthrown block. I examined the trapping and migrating potential of this structure in four different stratigraphic cases. Thus, holding the structural geometry constant and varying the stratigraphy empha size how trapping and migration are influenced by stratigraphic geometry. Where stratigraphic geometry varies along the strike of a fault, that variation must be plotted on the fault-plane section. This aspect of stratigraphic geometry is not emphasized in the cases used in this paper. The fault-plane section (Figure 2) is constructed along the fault in Figure 1. IWo conventions will be used throughout these cases: (1) the downthrown block section is placed in front of the upthrown, and (2) permeable sandstones are indicated by blocked ends, shales by open spaces. One can examine the fault-plane section to determine the migration and trapping relationships at the fault. In case 1 (Figures 2, 3A), the stratigraphic geometry is such that permeable sandstone is placed against the highest position of every permeable sandstone along the fault in each fault block. Strict adherence to the assumptions of the model disallows any fault traps in all permeable sandstones in both fault closures. Upon reaching the fauh, hydrocarbons entering either fault block at the base of the section will cross into the other block at a sandstone/sandstone contact, move updip in that block when against a shale, and spill back into the other block at a sandstone. This process can continue throughout the structure. Hydrocarbons migrate vertically, not up the fault, but at the fault, in a zigzag, spiraling, cross-fault pattern referred to as cross-fault vertical migration. However, each time hydrocarbons cross into the downthrown block into an area of unfaulted simple closure, they migrate to the crest of the simple closure area and fill it back to the fault before continuing the cross-fault verti cal migration. Figure 3A shows the seven stacked sandstones (X7) filled with hydrocarbons to the limits of unfaulted simple closure. Case la (Figure 3B) has the same fault geometry and apparent dips along the fault and, therefore, the same fault-plane section as case 1. But lacking the area of unfaulted simple closure, case la cannot be expected to trap hydrocarbons. With a stratigraphy of thinner shales than those used in Figure 2, even a small fault with a low rate of throw change can preclude fault traps. This structural and stratigraphic geometry (case 1), though disallowing fault traps, is excellent for vertical migration and for charging the area of unfaulted simple closure for every sandstone with a continuous top seal. (For a discussion of top seal properties, see Downey, 1984.) Accumulations in sequences with a high percentage of sandstone layers are typically confined to the areas of unfaulted simple closure; the many stacked accumulations are filled back to but not trapped by the fault. Case 2 In case 2 (Figures 4, 5), the stratigraphic geometry is changed; the number of sandstone layers decreases, thereby increasing some shale thicknesses. In this case, hydrocarbons migrating within the structure encounter three sandstone layers, one downthrown and two upthrown, adjacent to shale at their highest positions along the fault. The model permits trapping at each of these high points and downdip along the fault until, by virtue of the throw change, a sandstone is encountered in the adjacent fault block. At each of these points, called "cross-fault spillpoints," hydrocarbons spill from the base of the trap into the adjacent fault block and migrate updip. Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of these fauh traps in the map view by plotting the cross-fauh spill points and the water levels they control. For convenience, ail accumulations are plotted on the same map. Also within the area of unfaulted simple closure, every sandstone (X4, Figure 5) is filled with hydrocarbons, with only the one fault-trapped accumulation extending beyond the simple closure in the downthrown area of fault closure. This interplay of stratigraphic and structural geometries offers an explanation for the presence of fault traps for some sandstones but not others within the same area of closure and the different column heights of the trapping sandstones. The way cross-fault spillpoints control column height is a special check to investigate the validity of the model\'s assumptions in a given setting. Identifying cross-fauh spillpoints offers a predictive tool when the assumptions of the model are valid. graphic geometry. Three sandstones (Figure 6) in the upthrown fault closure have shale across the fault from their highest position. The deepest sandstone encounters a sandstone across the fault and spills at a cross-fault spillpoint. The middle sandstone encounters no cross fault spillpoint and can fill with hydrocarbons to a synclinal spillpoint. In this model, therefore, synclinal spill occurs only in those circumstances where no cross-fault spillpoint is encountered within closure. Recognizing cross-fault spillpoints explains why filling to a synchnal spillpoint is rare, especially for structures with high rehef and faults with a high rate of throw change. Thick seals are indeed important. This case is the first example of hydrocarbons leaving the structure laterally by synclinal spill, thereby ending the chain of cross-fault vertical migration. But what Case 3 Case 3 (Figures 6, 7), which has fewer sandstone lay ers, illustrates the effects of a thick seal within the stratiabout the highest trapping sandstone? It, too, is against tionship but with the common water level controlled by a the large shale, and fault-plane-section analysis indicates spillpoint from the downthrown bed. Figure 9 is the map that it is in a trapping geometry down to its indicated view of these traps. Note that the common spillpoint may cross-fault spillpoint. The model, however, predicts that occur on the same fault, as in this example, or on another this sandstone cannot be charged by cross-fault vertical fault; it may also be synclinal. migration. It must, therefore, receive hydrocarbons by lateral migration from the spill of a downdip closure or from a different source bed. Otherwise, this sandstone Case 5 would be an example of unfilled trap capacity because of a barrier to vertical migration—the thick seal. Figure 7 is Faults that die out on structure are common in some the map view for case 3, with two accumulations in the structural styles. Case 5 (Figure 10) is an example of this area of simple closure (X2). The two fault traps can be situation. The section (Figure 11) is a regular cross secfilled by vertical migration; the upper fault-trapped tion with no fault and changes into a fault-plane section sandstone requires lateral migration. as throw increases. Cross-fault spillpoints occur where the overlying shale thickness equaJs the fault throw. The top three sandstones illustrate this relationship of Case 4 coluiim height to the overlying shale thickness. Progressively thinner shales have their thicknesses equalled by The next change in stratigraphic geometry illustrates a the throw higher on the structure and control progres common trapping geometry I refer to as backfilling—the sively smaller column heights of the underlying sandprocess by which a trap is filled to the spillpoint of the stones. The thickness of the shale overlying the lowest trap into which it spills. The fault-plane section (case 4, sandstone is not exceeded by throw within the area of cloFigure 8) has three trapped accumulations. The lowest, sure, and that sandstone fills to a synclinal spillpoint. filled by cross-fault vertical migration, spills hydrocar The fields from which this example was compiled combons by a cross-fault spillpoint into the downthrown monly illustrate another relationship. The beds above the block (X). The bed into which the hydrocarbons spill is thick shale that allows the lower reservoir to be filled to against sandstone at its highest point and spills hydrocar- the syncline are oil reservoirs with or without gas caps; bons back across the fault into the upthrown block (Y). the reservoir below is the top of a sequence of gas reserThe bed in the upthrown block into which these hydro- voirs. By allowing the gas reservoir to fill to a synclinal carbons spill is in a trapping geometry, and its spiUpoint spillpoint, the thick shale is a barrier to cross-fault verti(Z) is lower than the highest point of the juxtaposed bed cal migration and shields the upper sandstones from gas in the downthrown block. When hydrocarbons fill down- flushing. The implication is that hydrocarbons in the ward into the bed in the upthrown block, they fill back upper sandstones reached the structure by lateral migraacross the fault (spillpoint Y) into the downthrown block tion. Downdip of these fields are traps that spill oil into and fill that bed to the same water level as the upthrown these sandstones from either cross-fault spillpoints on block with which it shares a common spillpoint (Z). The faulted noses or synclinal spillpoints. Many structures are, of course, more complex, and many closures depend upon the relationship at two or more faults for trapping. Case 6 illustrates fault-planesection analysis applied to a closure for which two faults form a trap—the closure upthrown on a faulted nose cut by two faults (Figure 12). \'Bvo fault-plane sections are necessary. Fault-plane section A A \' (Figure 13) of fault I, a large fault, shows fault II in its upthrown fault block. At the crest of the closure area, sandstones M and N are against shale across both faults. Fault-plane section BB \' (Figure 14) is for fault II, a smaller fault that dies out off structure. (Note the thinner N sandstone is against shale farther downdip than the thicker M sandstone.) On each of these sections, the cross-fault spillpoints that control the water levels are indicated. The lower cross-fault spillpoints and water levels (X on Figure 13, Y on Figure 14), predicted by either section alone, are also indicated. The water level of each sandstone is controlled by the higher of the two spiilpoints. Therefore, the water level for the M sandstone is determined by the cross-fault spillpoint at fault II and that of the N sandstone at fauh I. Hydrocarbons leaving these accumulations from the same fault closure migrate into different fault blocks (Figure 12). Because faulted noses lack opposing dip across their faults, the assumptions of the model preclude vertical migration, and hydrocarbons must enter the traps from lateral migration. Case 7 is a flank of a salt structure. A large fault, tangential to the salt face, decreases in throw away from the salt (Figure 15). For this example, the salt is assumed to provide a seal. The upthrown fault block has steeper dip and the downthrown block is more gentle. Thin shales lie in the upper part of the sequence, thicker shales in the lower. In the lower part of the sequence, trapping potential is present in a number of sandstones (Figure 16). Coliunn heights vary with the thicknesses of juxtaposed shales and many opportunities for backfilling are present. In the shallower strata, little or no opportunity for trapping is available, and migration occurs by crossfault vertical migration at the salt face. As predicted by this model, stratigraphic geometries with thick sandstones and thin shales along salt flanks, which account for very large volumes of sandstones in closure, trap very the probability of traps in a fault closure. small volumes of hydrocarbons when dependent upon fault closure. Usually fault-plane sections on more than one fault are necessary to determine the trapping potenMIGRATION CONCLUSIONS tial for a flank of a salt structure. Salt structures and other very complex structures can have more than one The model\'s assumptions place some severe convertical migration path. straints upon migration. The resulting logic can give In summary, all these cases are interpreted as being full insight into distribution, not only in terms of volume but to trap capacity, although the cases have sandstones in also type of hydrocarbon. The assumption that faults are closure without hydrocarbons. Trap capacity, as defined not conduits for migration and that vertical migration by this model, is controlled by the juxtaposition of strata takes place by a combination of cross-fault migration along faults. Trap capacity is usually significantly less and updip flow can significantly affect the type of hydrothan available closure if faults were assumed to seal and carbon being preferentially migrated from an accumulais frequently different for each permeable unit within the tion. This model predicts that spill from an accumulation area of closure. This distinction is an important one to is at the base—at the water level—at a cross-fault spillmake before interpreting empty closure capacity as being point. Later generated hydrocarbons are lighter, so they the result of hydrocarbon-charge limitations or seal rise to the top of a trap. When the trap is full, earlier gencapacity. erated hydrocarbons are displaced at the spiUpoint at the base of the trap. This displacement implies that a higher percentage of earlier generated hydrocarbons will probaCRITICAL PARAMETERS bly move upward in a structure and that gas flushing will progress from deeper to shallower traps, spilling oil The examples presented illustrate the parameters criti- upward in a structure. This model, therefore, gives a very cal to the model: structure and closure style, fault geome- different prediction from one that assumes trap capacity tries, and stratigraphic geometry. Different is controlled by seal failure and hydrocarbons leave an opportunities are offered for migration and trapping by accumulation either by direct migration up a fault or unfaulted purely simple closure vs. faulted closure and in through an inadequate top seal. Seal failure models preanticlinal structures vs. faulted noses. A key parameter is dict a higher probability of hydrocarbon leakage from the change in throw along the strike of a fault. Throw and the top of an accumulation, which favors preferential rate of change of throw control cross-fauh spillpoints vertical migration of lighter hydrocarbons. and, hence, water levels and column heights. The need of Figures 17 and 18 illustrate the relationship between the best map available is obvious to separate areas of lateral migration and cross-fault vertical migration. Figunfaulted simple closure from areas of fault-dependent ure 17 is a cross section through a series of simple anticlinal closure, paying particular attention to fault unfaulted anticlines. Hydrocarbons fill an anticline to throw, change in fault throw, and apparent dips adjacent the syncline, spill from the base of the reservoir, then to the faults. Better maps generate better fault-plane sec- migrate and fill the next anticline to its synclinal spilltions. point. Migration is from deeper closures in a basin nearer Stratigraphic geometry is often the most difficult to or within mature source rock to the shallower closures. parameter to derive and often must be extrapolated over The lighter, later generated hydrocarbons follow, mix long distances and estimated from depositional models with, and spill the earlier, heavier hydrocarbons (Gusderived from seismic and subsurface data. Stratigraphic sow, 1968). Figure 18 is a fault-plane-section diagram for geometry is the thickness and distribution of permeable vertical migration as perceived in this model. A compariand impermeable units, not merely the percentage of per- son of Figures 17 and 18 clarifies that vertical migration meable units. When the structural geologist understands by cross-fault spillpoints is geometrically the same as lateral migration bent back upon itself and has the same selectivity for heavier hydrocarbons moving updip. Within faulted structures, the follov/ing migration conclusions come from the model\'s assumption that faults are neither seals nor conduits. (1) Faulting and appropriate dips across the fault are necessary for vertical migration. (2) Vertical migration is not up the plane of faults. Vertical migration occurs at the fault by a combination of updip migration and cross-fault migration at defined cross-fault spillpoints. (3) Vertical migration spill is from the base of an accumulation the same as it is in lateral migration. (4) Lighter hydrocarbons spill heavier hydrocarbons upward within a structure. (5) Synclinal spillpoints define the stratigraphic upper limits for vertical migration paths and are points of egress for lateral migration. (6) For hydrocarbons to enter a trap higher in a structure than a syncUnal spiUpoint or a cross-fault spillpoint on a faulted nose, the hydrocarbons must enter by lateral migration from a downdip spillpoint or be derived from another source. 811 traps could be the loci of early expelled hydrocarbons insulated from later dilution or flushing. Analysis of the sections along fault planes is used to study defined accumulations that determine whether the model\'s assumptions apply. The analysis becomes a predictive tool in trap analysis for basins or prospects where the assumptions are thought to apply. The critical test of the model for any location is the control of water levels. Why does the water level lie where it does? Are traps filled to the predicted cross-fauh spillpoints? Even the failure of fault-plane-section analysis to explain accumulations or the lack thereof is valuable information. This failure identifies situations where one or more of the assumptions can be partially or totally invalid and flags structural and stratigraphic situations or geologic settings where columns that exceed predicted heights can occur as well as settings where they are absent or significantly less. This paper has addressed those trap and migration analysis predictions that result from the model\'s basic assumptions. Where additional available geologic data significantly modify these assumptions, the predictions should be modified accordingly. One could modify the DISCUSSION predictions in certain geologic settings by including data such as the presence of open fractures in otherwise imperScale of fault-plane sections is a matter of local con- vious units, modifications of faults or fault zones that venience and depends largely upon structural and strati- render them permeable conduits on impervious barriers, graphic complexity of the interval under scrutiny. and hydrodynamic and abnormal pressure regimes. Vertical exaggeration is not preferred for detailed Before invoking other explanations for trap and analyses but can be useful in graphic displays of the migration observations, analyze the data by this method results. The same computer graphic techniques applicato ascertain what the model does and does not explain. ble to other cross sections and map work can be applied This model approach and the fault-plane-section techto fault-plane-section analysis. nique are useful tools for those working with the probMaps at more than one level are often needed for fault- lems of fluid migration and trapping. plane-section analyses. This requires determining the stratigraphic interval to which a map applies and can entail interpolating between the map levels to account for stratigraphic thicknesses and the transition from one
